RESEARCH INFORMATION SERIES ON ECOSYSTEMS
              Volume 18 No. 2
             May – August 2006




           Suitable Species
                  for
            Urban Forestry
                  3a
Foreword

Urban forestry is the care and management of tree populations in urban settings for the
purpose of improving the urban environment. Urban forestry advocates the role of trees
as a critical part of the urban infrastructure.

With an extensive and healthy urban forest, air quality can be drastically improved.
Trees help to lower air temperature and lesser urban heat island effect in urban areas.
This reduction of temperature not only lowers energy use, it also improves air quality, as
the formation of ozone is dependent on temperature. It also helps increase wildlife
population, and mitigates the overall urban environmental impact.

These two issues (Vol. 18, no. 2 and no. 3) of RISE have been reproduced based from
DENR Recommends on Suitable Species for Urban Forestry. These issue are intended
to provide information for people, especially urban planners, on what species of trees or
plants are suitable for urban forestry. It contains information on species distribution,
characteristics, site requirements, uses and propagation techniques.

May our readers find these issues informative and useful.




                                                            AGUSTIN A. PIÑOL
                                                              OIC-Director




                                                                                        2
Suitable Species for Urban Forestry

The urban forest exists in an environment dominated by people. This forest establishes
itself in small spaces available after all the necessary urban structures are built. It
survives the unfavorable environment, like compacted soils and polluted air.

The Master Plan for Forestry Development of DENR (1990) defines urban forestry as:

•   the establishment and management of forests in urban environments for the
    physiological and psychological well-being of the people;

•   a deliberate process of cultivating trees, shrubs or ornamental plants to offset the
    effects of pollution and at the same time provide aesthetic and scenic surroundings
    in an otherwise drab and dreary landscape of concrete and steel structures, asphalt
    roads, walks, parking lots and shanties along the railroad tracks;

•   a forest park, a nature center, a greenbelt, a boulevard lines with trees or flowering
    plants or even coconuts; a street with trees and other plants in the island or
    sidewalks; a vacant lot planted to trees and other green plants; and a school, or a
    hospital, or a factory yard with trees; or

•   a greening movement, a people-oriented forestry designed to raise the quality of the
    environment of the people in urban centers.

Rationale for its Establishment

Letter of Instruction No. 1312 issued in 1983, mandated the establishment of forest or
tree parks, greenbelts and other tourist attractions to:

•   enhance the beauty and improve the ecosystems of our communities thus, providing
    the populace with a healthy and wholesome environment and a place for rest and
    recreation;

•   make the people increasingly appreciate the need to preserve forests and restore, at
    the earliest possible time, our denuded areas.

Major urban forestry planting sites and areas:

•   roadways – these are along major thoroughfares such as expressways, diversion
    roads, highways and secondary access roads.

•   national parks and mini-forest parks – these are areas where people usually
    converge to rest and hold social gatherings or celebrations. These may be city-
    municipal/barangay parks and established national parks.

•   greenbelts – these are areas when planted serve as environmental pollution buffer
    or filters. These include public plazas, subdivisions, school and public grounds, or
    government compounds.




                                                                                        3
•   commercial and industrial compounds – these are fenced or walled-in areas
    containing business establishments.

Classification of plants suitable for urban ecosystem

Trees and plants for establishment in urban forest are chosen to grow and surpass the
condition of the particular site. They must be adaptable to a particular hardiness zone
and should possess suitable morphological characteristics and forms for very small
spaces. The root system should penetrate in restricted soil spaces surrounded mainly
with concrete/asphalt and underground transmission lines and utilities.

Poisonous gases and particulates abound in the air of urban sites. Planting of trees and
other species that can tolerate gaseous pollutants is desirable. And only species with
numerous stomates can absorb more air pollutants.

Particulate pollutant removal capability of vegetation is greatly affected by its
morphological make-up. Plants with modified parts like hairy leaves, twigs and petioles
trap particles more easily than smooth-textured plants. Trees with a high ratio of surface
area to volume of foliage, such as conifers, remove more particles per ground area per
unit of time than trees with a low ration. Coniferous and deciduous species with
abundant branch and twig structures provide particulate removal during cold months.

Plants in relation to resistance to air pollution are classified as follows:

•   Highly-Resistant Plant Species are those which show zero or almost zero percent
    injury and can naturally grow well even after exposure to high traffic density areas.

•   Moderately-Resistant Species are those that show only up to 20% injury per plant.
    Injury symptoms include discoloration of the leaves, defoliation and presence of
    foliar pests and diseases.

•   Non-resistant Plant Species are those that exhibit more than 50% injury per plant
    when exposed to polluted environment. Some plants totally shed their leaves and
    perform very poorly in areas where air pollution has worsened due to excessive
    emittance of exhaust gases from motor vehicles and factories.

Urban planners, therefore must carefully choose tree/plant species suitable to an
environment which is hostile to its growth and survival. They must know the species’
basic needs, site treatment and the appropriate maintenance for the success of the
urban forestry scheme.

This refopacket may serve as a guide for people, especially urban planners, on what
species of trees or plants are suitable for urban forestry. It contains information on
species distribution, characteristics, site requirements, uses and propagation techniques.




                                                                                        4
1. Acacia

Common name: Acacia (Raintree)

Scientific name: Samanea saman

Family: Mimosaceae

Distribution: Grows anywhere under the most severe natural conditions.

Characteristics

Commonly known as raintree or wattles, it is a hardy large spreading attaining a height
of 20 m or more. The main axis of the compound leaf has 4-8 pairs of branches, each
branch with 3-8 pairs leaflets. Flowers are small with extended stamens crowded
together in a cluster which appears like powderedpuff.

Site requirements

Grows anywhere under the most severe natural conditions.

Uses

Wood carvings, wall panelling, meat board and wood basins, ornamental, shade and
forage. Decoction of leaves, and bark is used for diarrhea and dysentery. Bark, stems,
leaves and seeds contain alkaloids.

Propagation: Seeds


2. Balitbitan

Common name: Balitbitan

Scientific name: Cynometra ramiflora

Family: Caesalpiniaceae

Distribution

Found throughout the Philippines, usually planted in parks and islands.

Characteristics

An erect, glabrous tree, branches are numerous and freely rebranched. Flowers are
yellowish, white, nearly regular, pods are hard, turgid, 2-4 cm long.

Site requirements

Clay to clay loam soil, average rainfall of 2,000 mm and average temperature of 28ºC.



                                                                                        5
Uses

Leaves are used as anti-herpetic; roots are purgative and the soil from the seeds can be
applied as lotion for skin diseases.

Propagation: Seeds


3. Baston de San Jose

Common name: Baston de San Jose

Scientific name: Cordyline terminalis

Family: Liliaceae

Distribution: Widely found in the Philippines

Characteristics

Grows to about 1-3 m high as an erect and smooth shrub. Leaves are rounded at the
base with a short point at the tip and nearly found on the apex of the simple stem,
whose surface area is marked with leaf scars. Flowers are slender, tubular pink, about 1
cm long, split into 6 equal lobes. Fruit globose about 5 cm in diameter.

Site requirements: Grows in any type of soil.

Uses

Tender young shoots may be eaten and taken with betel leaf and used as an effective
dose for chronic diarrhea. Outer part of the stem is taken with white salt to relieve
swollen gums.

Propagation: Seeds


4. Copper leaf

Common name: Copper leaf

Scientific name: Acalypha wilkesiana

Family: Euphorbiaceae

Distribution: Widely grown in the Philippines.

Characteristics

A hardy shrub 96-460 cm high; the attractive colored leaves are copper green, variously
mottled with red and purple, 10-18 cm long, 6-12 cm wide. Flowers are tiny and without
petals. The fruit (capsule) is small.


                                                                                      6
Site requirements: Grows in various types of soil.

Uses

It has become a popular hedge plant. The longer it is exposed to sunlight, the brighter
the leaf colors become.

Propagation: Stem cuttings


5. Guyabano

Common name: Guyabano

Scientific name: Anona muricata L.

Family: Annoceae

Distribution: Cultivated throughout the Philippines.

Characteristics

A small tree, 5-7 m high. Leaves are oblong-obovate to oblong, 2-15 cm long, pointed at
both ends, smooth, shiny, usually with petioles 5 cm long. Flowers are solitary, large,
yellowish or greenish-yellow. Fruit is avoid, up to 18 cm long or more.

Site requirements: Grows in various types of soil.

Uses

Cultivated for the fruit and also for medicinal purposes. Unripe fruit is for dysentery. The
crushed seeds are used to treat headlice. The leaves are used to treat coughs,
diarrhea, indigestion and inflammation.

Propagation: Seeds


6. Kamagong

Common name: Kamagong

Scientific name: Diospyros philippinensis

Family: Ebenaceae

Distribution: Widely grown in the Philippines

Characteristics

A tree reaching a height of 20 m and a diameter of 80 cm. Bark is blackish, rather
fissured and uneven. Leaves are 10-25 cm long alternate, feathery, oblong, pointed at


                                                                                          7
the apex, rounded or obtuse at the base. Fruit is large, fleshy up to 10 cm in diameter,
densely covered with golden brown hairs.

Site requirements: Grows in various types of soil.

Uses: The wood is mostly used for carving and special furniture.

Propagation: Seeds


7. Maluko

Common name: Maluko

Scientific name: Pisonia grandis Span.

Family: Nyctaginaceae

Distribution: Widely found throughout the Philippines.

Characteristics

An erect, unarmed tree or shrub, reaching up to 10 m high. The leaves are thin, ovate-
oblong, pale green, or yellowish-white when young. Fruits are long pediceled, club-
shaped, five-angled.

Site requirements: Thrives best in sandy loam, well-drained soil.

Uses

Used as an ornamental for its yellow leaves. Young tender leaves which taste like
lettuce which when moistened with Eau de Cologne, are used to subdue inflammation in
the legs and other parts of the body.

Propagation: Seeds


8. Adelfa

Common name: Adelfa

Scientific name: Nerium indicum

Family: Apocynaceae

Distribution

Found throughout the Philippines especially in backyard and gardens.




                                                                                      8
Characteristics

An erect, smooth shrub reaching a height of 10-13 m, the leaves are mostly in whorls of
3-4 cm; flowers are fragrant, funnel-shaped. Fruits are in pairs, cylindrical and narrowed
at both ends.

Site requirements: Thrives in sandy loam soil.

Uses

As a potted plant, it is used to decorate halls and conference rooms. In mass plantings,
it gives an effective display of the beautiful flowers clusters.

Propagation: Stem cuttings and layering.


9. African tulip

Common name: African tulip

Scientific name: Spathodea campanulata

Family: Bignoniaceae

Distribution: Generally found all over the Philippines

Characteristics

A medium-sized evergreen tree. Wood is soft and trunk is sturdy forming buttresses.
Leaves are shiny, dark green, 30-46 cm long, dividend into 4-8 pairs of leaflets with an
extra one at the tip.

Site requirements

Thrives in most types of soil from sea level to an elevation of about 1,500 m.

Uses

Fodder, bee forage, fuelwood, ornamental, poles, timber, carvings, medicine and
windbreak.

Propagation: Seeds, stem and root cuttings.


10. Bandera española

Common name: Bandera española

Scientific name: Canna indica L.

Family: Combretaceae


                                                                                        9
Distribution: Cultivated throughout the country and throughout the year.

Characteristics

A coarse, smooth herb which grows up to 1-5 m high. The erect unbranched stem
arises from a fleshy rootstock. Leaves are solitary, in two opposite rows along the stem.
Flowers are attractive, showy, irregular in form. The fruit bears roundish black seeds.

Site requirements: Thrives in good soil with abundant water supply.

Uses: Generally used as ornamental and hedges.

Propagation: Clumps


11. Bougainvilla

Common name: Bougainvilla

Scientific name: Bougainvillaea spectabilis

Family: Nyctaginaceae

Distribution: Widely cultivated throughout the Philippines.

Characteristics

A woody climber reaching a height of 20 m or more with a large, strong thorny stem and
drooping branches.

Site requirements: Grows in many types of soil but more vigorous in sandy loam

Uses: For landscaping,as ornamental and hedges

Propagation: Stem cuttings and layering.


12. Bunga

Common name: Bunga

Scientific name: Areca cathecu L.

Family: Palmae

Distribution

Cultivated in inhabited areas throughout the country, in some places they grow wild.




                                                                                       10
Characteristics

A tree with an erect, solitary trunk up to 25 m high and marked with annular scars.
Leaves are up to 4 m long with numerous leaflets. Flowers are yellow.

Site requirements: Grows in all types of soil.

Uses

For live fencing, soil conservation, windbreak, ornamental, medicine, timber, fuelwood
and food spices. “Ubod” is edible, often cooked or eaten as salad.

Propagation: Seeds


13. Caballero

Common name: Caballero

Scientific name: Caesalpinia pulcherrima (L.) Sw.

Family: Leguminoceae

Distribution: Found throughout the Philippines

Characteristics

An erect, glabrous sparingly spiny shrub or small tree, 1.5-8 m high. Leaves are
bipinnate, pinnae 4-8 pairs. Flowers are red and yellow about 4 cm in diameter.

Site requirements: Grows in any type of soil.

Uses: Ornamental, fuelwood and windbreak.

Propagation: Seeds


14. Campanilla

Common name: Campanilla

Scientific name: Thevetia peruviana

Family: Apocynaceae

Distribution: Widely cultivated throughout the country.

Characteristics

An erect, branched, smooth shrub, 2-5 m high. Leaves are linear, stalkless and shiny.
Fruits is drupe, smooth and green, somewhat about 3-4 cm in diameter.


                                                                                    11
Site requirements: Grows in any type of soil.

Uses: For ornamental and medicinal purposes.

Propagation: Seeds


15. Giant ipil-ipil

Common name: Giant ipil-ipil

Scientific name: Leucaena leucocephala

Family: Leguminoceae

Distribution:

Found throughout the Philippines in inhabited areas at low and medium altitudes.

Characteristics:

A slender tree that may grow up to 20 m high. It has feathery leaves, bunched of long,
brown pods and often almost translucent and small, white “powderpuff” flowers.

Site requirements: Grows in various soil types.

Uses

Widely used for industrial purposes, for N.-fixation, soil improvement, windbreak, green
manure, fence posts, building poles, tannin, transmission poles, short fiber pulp, hedges,
live fencing, food and bee forage.

Propagation: Seeds


16. Lumbang

Common name: Lumbang

Scientific name: Aleurites moluccana (L.)

Family: Euphorbiaceae

Distribution

Found throughout the Philippines at low and medium altitudes in secondary forests.




                                                                                       12
Characteristics

A large tree reaching a diameter of 80-150 cm with an average height of 24 m in the
dense stand and 21.4 m in the open stand. The outer bark is grayish white, while the
inner bark is reddish when cut. Leaves are simple and alternate. Flowers are white with
soft hairs.

Site requirements

Grows on various soils but yields best returns if planted on a deep, well-drained soil;
could tolerate thin soil with a heavy, compact and adobe subsoil. Grows well with
minimum or heavy rainfall.

Uses

Generally used for fuelwood, converted timber and ornamental. Oil extracted from
seeds is used to manufacture paint, soap, varnish and wood preservative. A 100%
lumbang oil is used to temper hardwood.

Propagation: Seeds


17. Mayana

Common name: Mayana

Scientific name: Coleus scutellaroides or Coleus blumei Benth.

Family: Labiatae

Distribution: Widely grown throughout the Philippines

Characteristics

A short-lived herbaceous, annual which may attain a height up to 1 m; has erect, four-
angled, somewhat juicy stems; leaves are in pairs, egg-shaped; flowers are long-stalked
and boat-shaped.

Site requirements: Grows well in loamy soil rich in wet leaf mold

Uses

Generally cultivated for its ornamental foliage. Decoction of the plant taken internally is
a cure of dyspepsia; used as an eyedrop or opthalmia; and as poultice for headache and
wounds.

Propagation: Seeds, cuttings




                                                                                        13
18. Narra

Common name: Narra

Scientific name: Pterocarpus indicus Willd.

Family: Fabaceae

Distribution

Grows throughout the Philippines and attains commercial size anywhere. A fairly large
number are found in Cagayan, Mindoro, Palawan, Agusan and Cotabato.

Characteristics

A large tree which grows up to 40 m high. It has a dense, drooping crown.

Site requirements

Thrives best in moist, sandy loam or clay loam soil, along gullies and streambanks of low
and medium elevations. It grows in elevations as high as 1,300 m. Species grows well
in any four climatic types of the Philippines. It is adapted to temperature, 22-32ºC and
an average annual precipitation of 2,366 mm.

Uses

Narra is the best known wood for furniture. A good source of red dye and has medicinal
properties.

Propagation: Potted seedlings, cuttings


19. Palawan cherry

Common name: Palawan cherry

Scientific name: Cassia nodosa L.

Family: Caesalpiniaceae

Distribution

Grows throughout the Philippines especially in Palawan where it grows wild.

Characteristics

An unarmed tree, attaining a height of 10-15 m. The leaves are about 30 cm long, each
divided into 5-12 pairs of elliptic leaflets 1-2 cm long. Most of the leaves are shed before
flowering starts. It blooms from March to April.

Site requirements: Thrives best in sandy loam soil.


                                                                                         14
Uses: As an ornamental shade, or a nurse tree.

Propagation: Seeds


20. Palomaria (Bitaog)

Common name: Palomaria (Bitaog)

Scientific name: Calophyllum inophyllum L.

Family: Guttiferae

Distribution: Found along seashores throughout the Philippines.

Characteristics

A medium-sized, or large tree, reaching a height of 20 m. It has a spreading crown with
large branches.

Site requirements

Grows in areas with elevation as high as 750 m asl. Thrives best in well-drained soil.

Uses

Used for oil and fuelwood. Crushed kernels are used to cure gas pain, indigestion, colic
and rheumatism.

Propagation: Seeds


21. Palosanto

Common name: Palosanto

Scientific name: Triplaris cumingiana Fisch. and Mey.

Family: Polygonaceae

Distribution

Widely grown in the provinces of Luzon, namely: Laguna, Quezon, Marinduque, Albay
and Batangas, and in some provinces in Visayas and Mindanao.

Characteristics

A tree reaching a height of about 10 m and a diameter of about 30 cm with distinct
hallow inside the trunks to branchlets




                                                                                         15
Site requirements: Thrives best in well-drained soil.

Uses: Wood is used for temporary construction. Used as ornamental.

Propagation: Wildlings, cuttings, seeds


22. Poinsettia

Common name: Poinsettia

Scientific name: Euphorbea pulcherrina Willd.

Family: Euphorbiaceae

Distribution: Found all over the Philippines.

Characteristics

It is an erect, laxly branched shrub with milky juice; grows to a height of 1-4 m.

Site requirements: Generally found in areas with cool climate.

Uses

Cultivated for ornamental purposes; has medicinal properties. The leaves are applied as
poultice for erysipelas and various cutaneous affections.

Propagation: Cuttings


23. India rubber tree

Common name: India rubber tree

Scientific name: Ficus elastica Roxb.

Family: Moraceae

Distribution: Grown throughout the Philippines

Characteristics

A spreading glabrous tree reaching a height of 10 m normally starting as an epiphyte,
sending down numerous adventitious roots from the trunk and larger branches.

Site requirements: Thrives best in well-drained soil




                                                                                     16
Uses

An ornamental plant for either indoor, or outdoor. A decoction of the aerial rootlets is
used as a vulnerary. The latex is administered to cases of trichomoniasis. The leaves
and stems contain sponin, tannin and fats. The bark is used for fiber and timber.

Propagation: Seeds


24. Molave

Common name: Molave

Scientific name: Vitex parviflora

Family: Verbenacea

Distribution

Grown throughout the Philippines; commonly found in secondary and open primary
forests.

Characteristics

A medium- to large-sized tree attaining a diameter of 100-150 cm and a height of 25-30
m. It has a short, crooked or fluted trunk.

Site requirements

Grows in areas with an elevation of about 600 m asl, thrives in clay and sandy loam
soils. It also grows in limestone rocks covered with adequate soil and gently sloping
ground to steep slopes.

Uses

Being one of the hardest woods, it is used as railroad ties, used for ship building, wagon
making, bridges, cabinets, carabao yoke, tool handles, balusters, novelties, agricultural
implements, fuelwood and medicine.

Propagation: Seeds


25. Moluccan sau

Common name: Moluccan sau

Scientific name: Albizia falcate or Paraserianthes falcataria

Family: Leguminosae




                                                                                       17
Distribution

Moluccan sau plantations abound in Bukidnon, Surigao, Agusan and other parts of
Mindanao as well as in Palawan.

Characteristics

It attains a total height of 24-30 m and a diameter of 6 cm. The crown is narrow in
closed plantations but spreads at the top in open plantations. It grows so fast that it is
sometimes called a “miracle tree”.

Site requirements

Thrives best in areas with temperature, 22-29ºC and adapts well to areas below 1,500 m
asl; grows in well-drained deep, fertile, moist, slightly alkaline and acidic soils.

Uses

Commonly used as shade tree to cocoa, coffee, banana and tea plantations. It is used
for pulp and paper purposes. Its leaves are high in protein which can improve soil
fertility. Bark is a good source of tannin and water soluble gum.

Propagation: Seeds


26. Pandan

Common name: Pandan

Scientific name: Pandamus odoratissimus

Family: Pandanaceae

Distribution

Widely found in the Philippines along hillsides, elevated areas, particularly in shaded
places, seashores and backyards. There are 40 known species in the Philippines.

Characteristics

An erect plant reaching a height of 8 m; also called “screw pine” because of its spiny
leaves which grow from the stems in a cork-screw fashion. It has prominent prop roots
at the lower base of the stem. The trunk has a diameter of 12-15 cm.

Site requirements

Grows vigorously under humid conditions and on clay loam soil.




                                                                                       18
Uses

Strips of pandan leaves make exquisite, fine mats, hats, baskets, slippers, ladies’
handbags and portfolios. Roots of pandan in decoction are diuretic, cardiotonic, used in
cases of threatened abortion and aphrodisiac.

Propagation: Suckers


27. San Francisco

Common name: San Francisco

Scientific name: Codiaeum variegatum

Family: Euphorbiaceae

Distribution

The most widely cultivated ornamental plant throughout the Philippines and throughout
the year.

Characteristics

A long-lived, erect, branched, shrub attaining a height of 1-2 m. Leaves vary in size,
form and color. Cultural forms recently introduced to the Philippines from Hawaii, are
richer in color and have larger leaves.

Site requirements

Grows in almost any any kind of soil with the least care, although humus soil hastens its
growth and development. It is resistant to diseases, pests and moderate drought.

Uses

Used for boarders, hedges, screen, fences, mass planting, foliage and flower
arrangement, also used as a potted plant.

Propagation: Stem cuttings, marcotting


28. Tsitsirika

Common name: Tsitsirika

Scientific name: Catharanthus roseus

Family: Apocynaceae




                                                                                      19
Distribution

Widely established in many parts of the Philippines, very abundant along sandy areas
and seashores.

Characteristics

An erect, smooth or slightly hairy, slightly branched perennial herb about 30-50 cm high.
Stem is somewhat woody. The flowers are stalkless, regular, bisexual, white, pink, red
or purple; and borne in pairs at the apex.

Site requirements: Grows best in loam soils with compost and organic matter.

Uses

The plant contains alkaloids, vitamins and antibiotics to which several medicinal uses
are attribute. The alkaloids are used to control leukemia and certain neoplastic
diseases. A decoction of the root is used as emmenagogue and abortifacient and
purgative. Leaf infusion is antidiarrhetic.

Propagation: Cuttings


29. Yellow bell

Common name: Yellow bell

Scientific name: Allamanda cathartica

Family: Apocynaceae

Distribution

Cultivated throughout the country; semi-established in thickets near settlements.

Characteristics

A smooth or somewhat hairy shrub, 2-4 m high. The leaves are in whorls of three or
four, the uppermost ones may be scattered, lanceolate, 8-12 cm long, 2.5-4 cm wide.
The flowers are yellow short-stalked in clusters and look like bells.

Site requirements: Thrives in sandy loam soil.

Uses

Used for ornamental purposes; a good hedge plant. Infusion of the leaves is a remedy
for colic; it is purgative and serves as antidote for poisoning. The roots are reported to
be a powerful diuretic and tonic, antisyphilitic and vermifuge. A decoction of the flowers
and bark is administered for stomach pains.

Propagation: Cuttings, seeds


                                                                                       20
30. Yemane

Common name: Yemane

Scientific name: Gmelina arborea

Family: Verbenaceae

Distribution

Widely planted throughout the Philippines.       Plantations of yemane started in the
provinces of Cebu and Nueva Vizcaya.

Characteristics

Grows to a height of 30 m, a diameter of 60-100 cm and lives up to 40 years. Its leaves
are opposite, deciduous, entire, 10-20 cm long, 7-13 cm wide. Flowers are numerous,
trumpet-shaped, 4 cm long, nodding, hairy and short stalked. Bark is thin and grey-
colored.

Site requirements

Grows well in areas with about 750-4,500 mm annual rainfall and temperature 21-28ºC,
tolerates acidic calcareous and lateritic soil but thrives best in fertile, moist soil.

Uses

Primarily for pulpwood production because of its relatively high yield of kraft pulp low
chlorine requirement. Wood is used for general carpentry, joinery, furniture components
and other household fixtures. Timber is good for posts, housing and poles while rotary
cut veneers are for plywood. Also used as fuelwood, ornamental and shade.

Propagation: Seeds


31. Zigzag plant

Common name: Zigzag plant

Scientific name: Pedilanthus tithymaloides

Family: Euphorbiaceae

Distribution: Widely distributed in the Philippines throughout the year.

Characteristics

A shrub 1-1.5 m high with acrid milky juice. The stem is erect, zigzagged, or straight,
smooth and cylindrical. The green leaves are solitary at each stem joint; flower clusters
are grouped at the tip of the stem, fruit is about 1.2 cm long.



                                                                                      21
Site requirements: Thrives in many types of soils.

Uses

As ornamental plant, cultivated as hedge. The acrid milky juice is an effective protection
from browsing animals such as goats and cattle.

Propagation: Stem cuttings


References

Coronel, Roberto E. 1983. Promising fruits of the Philippines, UPCA, Los Baños 508 pp.

DENR-NCR-ERDS. 1991. Air-pollution-resistant trees and other plant species. 22 pp.

Hensleigh, T.E. and B.K. Holaway (eds.). 1988. Agroforestry species for the Philippines.
       AJA Printer. Manila 389 pp.

RISE. 1989 and 1990

The Philippines Recommends for Reforestation. 1992. Series No. 49-A. Revised Edition.
      113 pp.

Uriarte, M.T. 1994. Air-pollution-resistant plant species recommended for urban areas (A
        Highly-Resistant Species). Techno-info Series 4(1): April-June 1994.

______________. 1994. Air-pollution-resistant plant species recommended for urban
      areas (B. Moderately-Resistant Species). Techno-info Series 4(4): April-June
      1994. 65 pp.

______________. 1994. Some ornamental and tree species recommended for planting
      in Metro Manila. Their distribution and characteristics. Techno-Info Series 4(4):
      October-December 1994. 71 pp.

______________. 1994. Some plant species sensitive to air pollution. Techno-Info
      Series 4(3) July-September. 1994. 64 pp.

______________. 1995. Survey and characterization of selected urban forest parks in
      the National Capital Region. Techno-Info Series 5(2): April-July 1995. 38 pp.




                                                                                       22
